# Good with Words
I want you to imagine two people. The first is you, as you currently are. The second is also you, only with one difference: you've become really good with words. Now, I'm guessing that the second version of you, the one that's become really good with words, will be a lot better at school, if you're a student; at work, if you have a job; and also at connecting with people, whether on social media, through text messages or even while doing something I encourage all of you to do by the end of the course: craft a handwritten letter to someone you care about. And I certainly think the second version of you will be a lot better at perhaps the most common form of writing most of us do these days, which is e-mail. Just imagine what it would mean if you became 10 or 20 or perhaps 50 percent better at e-mail and all of the other writing you do. Think of the impact it would have on your career prospects, your relationships, your capacity to express yourself clearly and compellingly. My guess is that the impact would be pretty big, which is why we put together this MOOC. It's based on a course and workshop I've taught at the University of Michigan Law School, the University of Chicago Law School, and several law firms, government agencies, and non-profit organizations. But the materials have also been used by plenty of people outside of the legal profession. Here's just a partial list of the fields that folks who have taken the Michigan version of the course are pursuing: consulting, banking, medicine, social work, education, public policy, engineering, philosophy, design, music, data science, economics. And while I'll be focusing on how to become good with words in English, I'm told by the many international students and professionals I get to work with that these lessons are particularly useful for non-English speakers. Not just because they help you understand how to write better in English, but also because they contain principles that can improve the way you write in other languages as well. I've heard this from students of mine who grew up in China, Japan, Brazil, Germany, India, Ghana, Iran, Spain, Mexico, and many other countries. It's actually hard for me to think of a place or profession where it wouldn't help to be good with words. So let's get started.

# Making You More Persuasive
I mentioned in the first video that this MOOC started as an actual course, and part of what makes it unique is that you'll get a chance to experience that course. You'll get to read the book the students read, you'll get to do the exercises the students did. And best of all, you'll get to sit in on class discussions, thanks to a collection of videos, Brian Genoa, a media specialist at Michigan Law, has assembled. The hope is that these videos will help make this course more lively and interactive. That they will give you a chance to participate in a kind of back-and-forth dialogue that, when done well, really enhances learning. So I encourage you to talk back to the screen a little bit when you hear me ask a question, or just jot down some possible answers. See how your responses compare to what the students say. Test whether you're following along. Then maybe use the discussion board to add something that was left out of the conversation. You certainly don't have to do any of these things. There are many ways to engage with the course, and I definitely understand that some people may consume parts of it while commuting or taking a walk or doing the dishes. But we did want to at least give you the option to get a little more involved. Beginning with a couple of classroom exchanges, about the sometimes misunderstood relationship between being smart and being a good writer, as well as one about a key aim of this course: making you more persuasive. We've also included some optional videos. As I said before, there are a variety of approaches you can take to this course. The optional material is for those of you who have the time and interest to delve a little deeper. Writing is one of those wonderful skills and subjects about which there's always more to learn. We want to give you the chance to consume as much of it as you find useful.

# Teachers vs. Readers
In a widely viewed YouTube lecture called The Craft of Writing Effectively, Larry McEnerney of the University of Chicago candidly addresses an important fact: a lot of us have spent many years in an educational system in which people—namely, our teachers—have been paid to read our writing and care about the ideas we have.

If you’re still in school, it’s worth considering what is going to happen when you graduate and enter a world in which that kind of subsidized attention is no longer available. How might your current approach to writing need to change once it is no longer a given that anyone will be interested in what you have to say?

If you’re not in school, what has the transition to not having a captive audience been like? What adjustments have you made to the way you present your thoughts, knowing full well that many emails, reports, memos, and other things you write will, at best, get skimmed and, at worst, be completely ignored?

As technology columnist Farhad Manjoo explains in a piece aptly titled You Won’t Finish This Article, the abundance of immediately available media options—from Netflix to video games to Twitter—means that “it’s easier than ever, now, to switch to something else.” Manjoo then shares that in the past year “my wife and I have watched at least a half-dozen movies to about the 60 percent mark” and that “[t]here are several books on my Kindle I’ve never experienced past Chapter 2.”

“Maybe this is just our cultural lot,” he continues. “We live in the age of skimming. I want to finish the whole thing, I really do. I wish you would, too. . . . But who am I kidding. I’m busy. You’re busy. There’s always something else to read, watch, play, or eat.”

As you begin to work on your next writing project, keep the insights of both McEnerney and Manjoo in mind. Focus on your particular audience. Who are they? What do they care about? Why should they be interested in what you have to say?

Even if they are interested, you still need to think hard—though also with compassion and understanding—about the many other things that will be competing for their attention. Do they have kids? Do they get a lot of emails and requests? Is a small slot late at night, early in the morning, or during their commute the only space in their schedule for any kind of reading, let alone the extra bit you’re now asking them to add to their already-full plate?

Failing to realize that pretty much all readers are busy readers is a big mistake.

# Errors and Insights

One way to grasp the importance of being good with words is to think about a time when not being good with words really hurt you. Maybe you turned in a poorly- written paper or business report. Maybe you didn't get a grant you applied for or you found out an ad and other marketing materials you put together didn't quite connect with customers the way you wanted them to. Maybe you even got passed over for a job. There was an article in the Harvard Business Review a number of years ago on this last point. Here's the headline. I will not hire people who use poor grammar. The author runs two companies and he says, "Look, bad writing is unprofessional, bad writing is distracting, bad writing shows that you don't care enough to learn what good writing is and then you might not be somebody who pays attention to details." So part of this course is designed to help you reduce the errors that may be getting in the way of your academic and professional development.
Play video starting at :1:2 and follow transcript1:02
But reducing errors is not the only way to improve. We'll also make sure we increase our insights.
Play video starting at :1:9 and follow transcript1:09
I take this idea of errors and insights from the psychologist Gary Klein and his book Seeing What Others Don't. He considers both a necessary part of improvement. "Reducing errors will only get us so far," Klein says. "To really excel we also need to learn how to up our insights. We need to generate and absorb new strategies for approaching whatever it is we want to improve." To help with that, your first assignment will give you the chance to borrow insights from a host of excellent writers. These include the British novelist and essayist, Zadie Smith; the Argentine master of short stories, Jorge Luis Borges; the American judge, Richard Posner; as well as folks like Susan Sontag, Isabel Allende and ZZ Packer. As the MOOC progresses we'll also be returning to Gary Klein and other researchers who study the psychology of decision making because that is what good writing involves: consistently making good decisions. Decisions about words, decisions about structure, and decisions about the different aims of drafting and editing.
Play video starting at :2:16 and follow transcript2:16
These four topics are how this specialization will be arranged. We're going to have separate courses on each. There will be one on words, there will be one on structure, there will be one on drafting, and there will be one on editing. We're also going to work on throughout each of these sections one of the most important skills you can develop as a writer: time management. Of all the phrases that you could have associated with your name, here's one you definitely don't want: misses deadlines. So beginning with the errors and insights assignment, let's really start to examine our own habit, both good and bad, when it comes to finishing projects on time. People who can regularly produce high-quality work on schedule add a lot of value in schools and companies and in the wider community. Let's try to be one of those people.

# Mechanics and Strategy
Now that you've had a chance to do the errors and insights assignment, I want to introduce an additional pair of terms that will be helpful to us as we try to improve as writers and advocates: mechanics and strategy. Writing, I tell my students, is about those two things. It's about mechanics, which you might think of as the how of a sentence, paragraph, clause, or phrase, and it is about strategy, which you can think of as the why of a sentence, paragraph, clause, or phrase. Importantly, the two go together. The better your mechanics are as a writer, the more advance will be the strategies you're able to implement. And the more clearly, you can identify your strategy for a particular piece of writing, the easier it will be to figure out the mechanics necessary to implement it. We'll be using these terms throughout the MOOC. They can even help outline how the course is designed to operate. The mechanics, or how of the course, are going to involve a lot of opportunities to do short writing assignments thanks to a bunch of tools created by the Academic Innovation Team at Michigan. The strategy driving these assignments comes from an interesting place, a math professor at the University of Florida named Bruce Edwards. Explaining why it is so important to actually do calculus problems when you're trying to learn calculus, rather than just listen to someone talk through the concepts, Edwards says that learning often starts in your hand, travels up your arm, and only then lands in your brain. I think writing works the same way. I also think there's something magical, and at times transformative, about writing things down on a piece of paper, or if you prefer, typing them out on a computer. James Pennebaker of the University of Texas talks about this a lot in his books and articles on expressive writing, as Sian Beilock, a psychologist who ran the Human Performance Lab at the University of Chicago before becoming president of Barnard University in New York. In her 2011 book, Choke, Beilock discusses several studies that show how powerful and often calming writing can be when preparing for high pressure situations. We've included links to pieces by both Pennebaker and Beilock in this week's materials. I encourage you to check them out. Each supports a nice bit of advice the Dominican American writer, Julia Alvarez received from her grandma during a time when Alvarez, who grew up under the dictatorship of Rafael Trujillo was really struggling, "el papel aguanta todo." Which she translates as, "The paper can hold everything." Fears, regrets, anxieties, ambitions, even trauma. For our purposes, all it needs to hold is a record of your learning and development. But I hope that one of the benefits of this course is that even after it finishes, you treat writing not just as a way to communicate with other people, but also as a way to process and sort through difficult problems. You might even keep in mind an observation made by people as different as the novelist, Don DeLillo, and the Harvard Business professor, Clayton Christensen, who was famous for, among other things, the theory of disruptive innovation. Both have highlighted the way writing can be a form of discovery and problem-solving. Here's how DeLillo put it in an interview with The Paris Review in 1993. "I don't know what I think about certain subjects, even today, until I sit down and try to write about them." And here's what Christensen offers in his 2008 book, Disrupting Class: How Disruptive Innovation Will Change the Way the World Learns, which he co-wrote with Michael Horn and Curtis Johnson. "I never know how little I know about a subject until I try to write cogently about it." So take advantage of the time and tools this course gives you to put your thoughts into written words. You'll likely learn a lot, not just about writing, but about other subjects as well, including yourself.

# Map to a Decision
One of the things we started to stress in this course is that writing involves a lot of decisions. It can also be helpful to think of individual pieces of writing as creating a map to a decision. Maybe that's a decision about whether to rule in your client's favor. A legal brief creates a map to do that. Maybe that's a decision about whether to invest in a business. A prospectus creates a map to do that. Maybe it's even a decision about whether to give you a spot in a specific school, program, or organization. Think here of cover letters, admissions essays, and networking emails. The next series of classroom videos will explain the idea of writing as mapping in more detail. They will also highlight the role framing and word choice play in writing and in persuasion, more generally. You'll get to learn about the work of Nobel Prize winner, Daniel Kahneman, as well as the pioneering experiments done by Elizabeth Loftus on eyewitness testimony. You'll also be introduced to the Palestinian American poet, Naomi Shihab Nye. We'll be borrowing a concept from her that appears in a lovely poem she wrote about her grandmother. The concept is The Words Under the Words, and it's actually the title of the first chapter of the main book we'll be using, the name of which is the same as the name of our MOOC, Good with Words. Another place this concept shows up is in an additional set of materials we'll make available, which is a series of books called the Syntax of Sports. I wrote both Good with Words and the Syntax of Sports for courses I've taught at Michigan and Chicago. And we're very lucky that the wonderful people at Maze Books, who published them, are helpfully letting all of you have access to the web editions for free. Of course, if you prefer a print or Kindle edition, there'll be a link to show you how to get one. As far as completing the next set of assignments, I recommend you follow this order. Start by reading The Words Under the Words chapter in Good with Words, as well as if you want the optional reading from the Syntax of Sports. Then watch the series of classroom videos and finally, finish with the questions and exercises. That said, you're certainly welcome to move through these materials in any order you want. Later, we'll be looking at some helpful ideas about self-learning in a neat book called The End of Average by Todd Rose, who teaches at the Harvard School of Education. I'll give you a quick preview of one of its key lessons now, especially given how nicely it fits with the realization that people of all different ages, backgrounds, and commitment levels are taking this course along with you. To the extent you can, customize your education. Few syllabi were made with your particular skills, interests, and goals in mind. So take some control over how you learn and develop. If that means deviating from the default order in which this MOOC is set up, that is perfectly fine with me.

# Saints vs. Jerks

Now that you've had a chance to see the videos connecting writing with mapping, I want to push this idea a little further by pointing to an experiment mentioned in the best-selling book Switch by two brothers, Chip Heath who teaches at the Stanford Business School and Dan Heath who teaches at Duke. The experiment involved a food drive on a college campus. The point was to see if small changes in the way the food drive was advertised could increase the amount of donations. One announcement for the food drive contains some generic instructions to bring a can of food to where the drive was being held which was a well-known place on campus, something like the Student Union. The other announcement was much more detailed in ways that helpfully preview the benefits of a writing principle we'll explore in a few weeks, the Power of the Particular. The second announcement switch "can of food," which is pretty general, to the much more specific "can of beans." It also included the suggestion that the recipients think of a time they were going to be near the drop-off spot so they wouldn't have to go out of their way to make their donation. And getting back to our idea of writing and mapping, it included something that I think was the most brilliant of all: an actual map to the drop-off spot.
Play video starting at :1:21 and follow transcript1:21
It is probably no surprise that the second announcement, the one with the map and details, produced many more donations than the more nonspecific announcement. But here is what is really surprising about the experiment and also what highlights the power of a well crafted message. Before distributing the two announcements, the researchers sent surveys to students in the dorm who were going to receive them. The survey asked the students to identify which of the people in the dorm were most likely to make a donation and which were least likely to make one. Taking the responses as a proxy for charitableness, the researchers used the term "Saints" to describe the students identified as the most likely to donate and they used the term "Jerks" to describe the students identified as the least likely to donate. The researchers then checked who actually made a donation. Here's what they found. Of the Saints who received the generic announcement, so no map, 8% donated. Of the Jerks who received the generic announcement, so no map, 0% donated. Of the Saints who received the detailed announcement with the map, 42% donated. Of the Jerks who received the detailed announcement with the map, 25% donated. The key numbers there are the 8% and the 25%. Sending a detailed announcement to a Jerk was much more effective than sending a generic announcement to a Saint. As the Heath brothers put it, the researchers got the worst people in the dorm to donate simply by crafting a more concrete message. Or, as they wrote in somewhat more vivid terms, "If you're hungry and need a can of food, you're three times better off relying on a jerk with a map than on a budding young saint without one." What this means for writing is that we want to make sure our documents and even our emails and text messages are as user-friendly as possible. We want to make things easy on readers. We want to write and edit with empathy. I've included an optional essay, an assignment for those of you who want to explore this relationship between editing and empathy in greater detail. Both are materials I use in a class called Editing and Advocacy, which teaches students to use their writing to champion worthy causes and actually get people to do stuff. At its core is a message we have been stressing in this video.
Play video starting at :3:47 and follow transcript3:47
People are busy, people are stressed, people don't always have an abundance of time, patience or attention. So if you want to persuade them, if you want to help them make a certain decision or take a particular action, you need to lay out the steps in a clear, compelling way. You need to draw them a good map.

# Better at Getting Better
This course is called Good with Words, but its initial goal is to at least make you better with words. It also has a broader goal. I really hope the materials help you get better at getting better. I hope they help you improve how you improve. You can think of this as essentially learning to increase your rate of return. One way to do that is to take some lessons from the book Peak by the psychologist, Anders Ericsson and the mathematician and science journalist, Robert Pool.
Play video starting at ::36 and follow transcript0:36
Ericsson is often called the "expert on experts," because he has spent decades studying top performers in music, sports, and many other fields. If you ever heard of the 10,000 hour rule, he is the guy whose research led to its popularization. Though he's often said, including in his book, that 10,000 hours is a misleading simplification of his findings. The real key is not how long you practice but how you practice. Here is how he puts the point in Peak. "The right sort of practice carried out over a sufficient period of time leads to improvement. Nothing else." The term he uses to describe this right sort of practice is deliberate practice. Here are some of its key elements. "Deliberate practice develops skills that other people have already figured out how to do and for which effective training techniques have been established." Fortunately, writing is one of those skills we have already figured out. We are not the first ones to try to get better at it. There are tons of effective training techniques we can learn from and try. A second element of deliberate practice is, "The practice regimen should be designed and overseen by a teacher or coach who is familiar with the abilities of expert performers." Again, we got that covered. That's why I'm here, you can think of me as your teacher or coach. Although I certainly encourage you to also use each other as resources, particularly when it comes to getting feedback on your writing as well as ideas about helpful techniques and strategies to try.
Play video starting at :2:10 and follow transcript2:10
Now we come to a third and somewhat more difficult element of deliberate practice, but I hope many of you embrace it. "Deliberate practice takes place outside one's comfort zone and requires a student to constantly try things that are just beyond their current abilities. Thus it demands near maximal effort, which is generally not enjoyable." This is going to be the big question mark for how much you improve during this course and also in the weeks, months, and years that follow. If you're willing to push yourself, if you're willing to travel outside of your comfort zone and consistently give mere maximal effort, you're likely going to improve a lot.
Play video starting at :2:52 and follow transcript2:52
But even if you don't have that bandwidth at the moment because you are pressed for time and have other obligations, I hope you do keep in mind Ericsson's idea that just practicing isn't enough.
Play video starting at :3:3 and follow transcript3:03
You really want to be intentional, or as he says deliberate, about the steps you are taking and whether there is evidence to support their effectiveness.

# S.M.A.R.T. Goals and Stretch Goals

We talked in the last video about the book Peak by Anders Ericsson and Robert Pool. We focused in particular on this idea of deliberate practice. I don't want to overstate the importance of it however, especially given that research done by Brooke Macnamara, David Hambrick, and Frederick Oswald has found that plenty of other factors play a role in the development of expertise. But among the features of deliberate practice that I think will be useful to us is one that is built into the self-assessment exercise you have coming up: setting clear goals. Specifically, we'll be using what are called S.M.A.R.T. goals. Companies as different as GE, Toyota, and Coca-Cola have all at some point adopted S.M.A.R.T. goals, which are goals that are specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and timely, meaning there's a particular endpoint or deadline. Perhaps your S.M.A.R.T. goal will be mastering commas by the end of this MOOC. Perhaps it will be creating regular times to read your writing out loud before handing it in. I don't really care what you pick, my only wish is that you use your S.M.A.R.T. goal to add some focus and accountability to how you approach becoming a better writer. At the same time, there's also a place in your self assessment to be a little more bold and ambitious. This is an opportunity to create a stretch goal which as you'll learn in the assignment, involves radical expectations that go beyond current capabilities and performance. An example my students like to pick is publishing an op-ed, but maybe yours will be starting a blog, finishing a book, or using your writing to help land your dream job. Even if you don't reach your stretch goal, and you'll definitely want to make it hard enough for success not to be guaranteed, striving for it can lead to some beneficial outcomes and discoveries. You might think of it like the way Google thinks about its moonshot projects, even creating a whole separate entity to pursue things like self-driving cars, renewable energy, and delivering Internet access to some of the poorest, most remote places on the planet. Or you could think of it through what the prize-winning neuroscientist Solomon Snyder calls the Audacity Principle, which he defines as "being sufficiently courageous to ask 'important' questions." In either case, it's helpful to remember that it often takes a little courage and a lot of imagination to achieve great things, particularly when it comes to writing. 
